Here is the graph of half times x + 1/x. And we can change it to half times x^2 
+ 1/x^2. The left portion disappears in the middle of the transformation 
because you're taking roots of a negative number. Although their expressions 
look similar to polynomials, none of them look anything like polynomials or 
even trigonometric sums. So WHY does our mythology choose these people as our 
ancient ancestors? I remember having this same question as a kid. I would ask 
the village elders and it never bothered them, because sa they said, the 
mythology is not real. That response used to infuriate me. There must be some 
reason for this mythology. It's such an irrational response to just say it's 
not real. Heh, get it? It's irrational because it's not real. Wait, no, that 
doesn't work. Irrational numbers are real. If it's not real, then that would 
make it...

TITLE CARD

...then that would make it complex. Huh.

When we plotted half times x + 1/x, we only plotted it for the real values of 
x. What happens when you plot it even for complex values of x? We'll do a small 
intro to complex numbers, but before that let's see what the plot will look 
like. The input is no longer just the real number line, but instead it's the 
whole complex plane. The output of the function at each point can also be 
complex numbers, so they can't be represented by just a height like we were 
using earlier. Luckily for our plot all we're going to do is find out at which 
points the function outputs a real number, and plot only those points. So our 
inputs will be on the plane and the outputs will still be plotted as just a 
height. And when we do that, this is what we see. Now let's change the power 
from 1 to 2. And look at that! Arms are moving around in the complex plane, 
explaining how they popped in and out of the real graph. This plot isn't 
complete though, there's still new arms being abruptly created and that makes 
sense if you learn about branch cuts. I'll leave a link in the description to a 
really good series by Mathemaniac for learning more about complex functions. 
For us though, those arms are not what we're interested in. That thing in the 
middle there is what we're after! As you might have noticed, it looks like a 
sum of cosines drawn on a cylindrical surface!

To find out why that is, let's do a quick intro to complex numbers. Let's look 
at the plane of complex numbers. The x-axis here holds all the real numbers. 
These are the numbers whose imaginary component is zero. The imaginary 
component of a number is just its y-coordinate on this plane. Complex numbers 
with a real component x and imaginary component y are written as x + y times i. 
The point here with just an imaginary component of 1 is just called i. Now I'm 
going to define addition and multiplication for complex numbers. Addition is 
easy, to find the sum of two complex numbers you just add the real components 
separately and the imaginary components separately. This is the same as what 
you do for vector addition in 2D. This is a natural definition. There's a zero, 
that is a number which doesn't make any difference when added to another 
number. The sum a+b is the same as b+a, which you can verify by calculation or 
by thinking of them as vectors. The sum a+(b+c) is the same as (a+b)+c, which 
is true because it's true for the real compoenent and for the imaginary 
component. And for any number a, there is a number we call the negative of a, 
such that their sum is zero. Now subtraction can be defined as just addition 
with the negative of a number.

Multiplication is quite simple too. This point i, which has no real component, 
and an imaginary component of 1, when multipled by itself, is -1. To multiply 
two complex numbers, you can just expand this expression. We'll get 2 times 3, 
plus 2 times i, plus -i times 3, plus -i times i. We change i^2 to -1, put the 
real terms together and the imaginary terms together and we get the answer. It 
might seem like we just have to blindly follow the calculation to find out the 
answer, but hidden in this calculation is a very intuitive structure. For this 
we need to think of these complex numbers as vectors again. I can specify the 
complex number by the length of the vector, and the angle it makes with the 
x-axis. Let's do this for both the vectors we want to multiply, and let's just 
call the angles the red angle and blue angle so we don't have messy numbers. 
With the length and the angle, we can find the real and imaginary components 
using basic trigonometry. They are just length times the cosine of the angle 
and length times the sine of the angle. When written in this form, the 
multiplication becomes insightful. When we expand the multiplication and group 
the real and imaginary components, we get this. Do pause and verify it if you 
haven't seen it before. Using trigonometric identities that we saw in the 
previous video, this simplifies further. And suddenly we can see that the 
product is a complex number with length being the product of the two lengths, 
and angle being the sum of the two angles. This is often an easier way to think 
of the multiplication and it is very useful.

And this multiplication is very nice as well. There is a one, that is a number 
which doesn't make any difference when multiplied to another number. a times b 
is the same as b times a, because it doens't matter in which order you multiply 
the lengths and add the angles. The same reasoning shows that a times (b times 
c) is the same as (a times b) times c. Every complex number, except for zero, 
has a multiplicative inverse, that is a number you can multiply it with to get 
the answer 1. The length of the inverse should be 1/the length of the number so 
that the resulting length is 1. And the angle of the inverse should be the 
negative of the angle of the number so that the sum of the angles is 0. 
Division can be defined as just multiplication by the inverse of a number. 
Finally we have distributivity. a times (b plus c) is a times b plus a times c. 
Let the red point be a, the blue one b and the purple one c. Since we're 
multiplying with a, let's write a in its length and angle form. On the right 
hand side what we're doing is adding b and c, we know how to do that, and then 
multiplying it with a, which means scaling by the length of a, and then 
rotating by the angle of a. On the right hand side, we are multiplying b and c 
with a separately. So each one gets scaled by the length of a, and then rotated 
by the angle of a. And then when them up, we get the same exact answer. So 
multiplication and addition are very nicely structured for complex numbers. And 
that ends our introduction to complex numbers.

Now if you remember, this white circle here is actually the function we were 
plotting. Half times x plus 1/x. let's go back to x+1/x and look at what it 
does when x is a complex number whose distance is 1, since that's where the 
interesting part of the plot is. Let's use ctheta to refer to the point on this 
unit circle at an angle theta. If we're computing our function at this point, 
we'll want to know what 1/x is. So where is 1/ctheta? ctheta had length 1, so 
1/ctheta will also have length 1. ctheta had angle theta, so 1/ctheta should 
have angle -theta. When you add up ctheta and 1/ctheta, the imaginary 
components cancel out. What you have left is the sum of their real components, 
which would be cos(theta) + cos(theta). So the function value is this divided 
by 2, which is cos(theta). So yes, this simple complex function was actually 
plotting cos(theta) on a cylinder. What about half times x^2+1/x^2. Again, 
let's calculate it when x is ctheta. To compute x^2, we multiply the lengths, 
which remains 1, and add the angles, which becomes 2theta. So ctheta^2 is 
c2theta, or cos(2theta) + sin(2theta) times i. By the same argument as before 
1/ctheta^2 would be the point with angle -2theta. Again if we add them up and 
divide by 2, the imaginary parts cancel and we'd be left with cos(2theta). 
Clearly a similar story will play out for other degrees.

With this, we have our third representation of polynomials, so let's recall 
them now. We started with polynomials, which are combinations of 1,x,x^2, and 
so on. I've mentioned real there to specify that these combinations can involve 
real numbers but are not to involve complex numbers. Then we saw that every 
polynomial is a projection of a sum of cosines and versa. Here a sum of cosines 
means a real combination of 1, cos(theta), cos(2theta) and so on. And just now 
we saw that plotting a sum of cosines is exactly the same as plotting a 
specific kinf od complex function, which we'll call ancestors here because 
they're Trigidadian ancestors according to Trigidadian mythology. Ancestors are 
a real combination of 1, half times x+1/x, half times x^2+1/x^2, and so on. 
Here's an example.

If might be curious right now about the similarities between ancestors and 
polynomials, since they look somewhat similar. And we will analyze this in more 
detail, but first let's take a short look at complex polynomials. Since complex 
numbers can be added and subtracted and multiplied and they have all those nice 
properties we saw earlier, we can write polynomial-like expressions and they 
will make sense as functions where the inputs are complex numbers. Even the 
coefficients can be complex numbers and all the operations make sense. Since 
we've seen that division also makes sense, we can actually do things like 
factoring the polynomial. The analysis for complex polynomials and the real 
polynomials that we might be more comfortable with can be very similar. In 
fact, they can be so similar that we can even say that two different degree 5 
complex polynomials cannot intersect in more than 5 places. The proof for real 
polynomials goes through as is for complex polynomials too. I won't show the 
proof in this video, but I might show it in a bonus video. And just to be 
really explicit about what I mean by a complex polynomial, I just mean a 
complex combination of 1,x,x^2 and so on.

So our ancestors aren't complex polynomials. They have terms like 1/x and 1/x^2 
that also appear. So let's give a term for polynomials that also include these 
terms, let's call them fake polynomials. In this video, a fake polynomial is a 
complex combination of 1,x,1/x,x^2,1/x^2 and so on. When I say the degree of a 
fake polynomial,  just mean the largest power of x that appears, even if it's 
in a denominator. So ancestrs are clearly fake polynomials, although not all 
fake polynomials are ancestors. Now let's relate fake polynomials and complex 
polynomials.

Let's start by taking 2 different fake polynomials of degree 5. Now let's 
multiply both of them by x^5. Since every term in the fake polynomial is being 
multiplied by x^5, the new terms can have degree as large as 10, since you get 
x^10 when you multiply x^5 to an x^5 term. Or they can have degree as small as 
0, since you get 1 when you multiply x^5 to a 1/x^5 term. So what you have now 
are two convex combinations of 1,x,and so on till x^10. You have two degree 10 
complex polynomials. What's more, if the two fake polynomials had the same 
value at some input a, then the resulting complex polynomials will also have 
the same value at the point a. So the number of intersections of the two does 
not decrease. But we know the 2 degree 10 polynomials cannot intersect more 
than 10 times. That means that the 2 degree 5 fake polynomials could also not 
intersect more than 10 times.

That's right, fake polynomials have a limit to the number of times they can 
intersect. The Shev is back in business.

As mentioned in part 2, all that the Shev has to do now is to show that a sum 
of cosines, up to cos(5theta), that stays within -1 and 1, cannot have a slope 
larger than 5. Since plotting sums of cosines on a cylinder is the same as 
plotting an ancestor on the complex plane, let's plot the ancestor. So here's a 
contesting ancestor that claims to be of degree 5 and has a slope larger than 
5. In comes the Shev, in its newest form. Since it's being plotted on the full 
cylinder, it has 10 arcs. The Shev already knows what to do, it's done 
something like this before. First it multiplies itself by a constant slightly 
larger than 1, so that the contestant has to pass through each of the 10 arcs, 
with the contestant still having a higher slope than the enlarged Shev. Then 
teh enlarged Shev changes itself again, this time replacing all the x's with 
ctheta times x for some value of theta which we'll see later. When you compute 
this new function on input a, you get this. This is also what you get when 
computing the old function on input ctheta times a. ctheta has length 1 and 
angle theta. when you multiply it with some complex number a, you're just 
rotating a by an angle theta. So whatever the old function did is being done by 
the new function as well, but at a point that is an angle of theta away. This 
means that the new function is the same as the old function, but rotated by an 
angle of theta. And this theta can be chosen so that the two plots intersect at 
a point where the contestant has a slope larger than 5.

Note that this enlarged  and rotated Shev is no longer an ancestor, in part 
because it has coefficients that are complex numbers. But it still is a fake 
polynomial of degree 5. So it and the contestant can intersect at most 10 
times. We know they intersect at least once at each arc, but at this arc 
they're intersecting thrice. This is inevitable, if the contestant has a higher 
slope at the place where it's intersecting, it has to pass through the arc 
again in order to cross it.

So that's it. The contestant was forced to intersect 12 times with the enlarged 
and rotated Shev, but two degree 5 fake polynomials can intersect only 10 
times. So we know that the contestant was lying about being a degree-5 
ancestor. The Shev has just completed its dominance in the arena. Let's take a 
look back at the highlights that led the Shev to this point.

In this video the Shev shows that it is the best among all contesting ancestors 
of degree 5. And that means that it is also the best among all contesting sums 
of cosines up to cos(5theta). From the previous video we know that means that 
no contesting polynomial of degree 5 has a slope larger than 25 in the middle 
portion of the plane. Any slope larger than 25 must be in the areas 
corresponding to the last arcs of the Shev. But from the first video, we know 
that no polynomial can have a slope larger than that of the Shev in the last 
arcs of the Shev. Since the Shev does reach a slope of 25, we can be certain 
now that no contesting degree 5 polynomial can have a slope larger than Shev 
has. The Shev is unbeatable.

What about for other degrees though? Let's see how much of this proof works 
when we replace 5 with some degree d and 25 with d^2. The proof in this video 
will continue to work to say that the degree-d Shev is best among all ancesors 
of degree d. That will also continue to hold for sums of cosines. And the proof 
in part 2 holds too. It will continue to be the case that no contesting 
degree-d polynomial can have slope larger than d^2 in the middle part of the 
plane. And slope larger than d^2 must be in the areas correspoding to the last 
arcs of the Shev. The proof in part 1 will show that no degree-d contestant can 
have slope larger than that of the Shev in the last arcs of the Shev. And we 
saw in part 2 that the Shev has slope at least d^2. So in general, it is true 
that no contesting degree-d polynomial can have a slope larger than the maximum 
slope of the degree-d Shev.

: So what's next for the Shev?
: I thought I'd finally relax, but I've got to rush now. I got a weird letter 
today, from Society. It's asking me if I can help take on Potential Quantum 
Brutes. Got to go, bye!

