Here we are, entering the Shev's hometown of Trigidad and Tobano.
Trinidad and Tobago
Trigonad and Tiboda

Umm... why does everybody look different here? These aren't polynomials, 
they're weird curves that intersect themselves. Where are the polynomials? Oh, 
I see one near the center! I'll go talk to it first and find out more about 
these other curves. I don't want to make a fool of myself.

: Hello there, you're the only polynomial I could see. It's my first time here, 
can you please tell me who all these other people are?

: Who, me? You think I'm a polynomial and the others aren't? Well, you've made 
a fool of yourself there, haven't you?. Here, let me show you. You happened to 
see me from a particular angle. I'm like anybody else here, a sum of cosines 
drawn on the surface of a half cylinder. Hi, I'm cos(4theta)/3 - cos(3theta)/4

: Whoa! You looked exactly like a polynomial earlier.

: Heh. Okay, you should probably sit down. This might take a while.

----

Okay, cos(4theta)/3 - cos(3theta)/4 was kind enough to explain everything to 
me. It's incredible, just like a polynomial is a combination of 1, x, x^2, x^3 
and so on, these people are combinations of 1, cos(theta), cos(2theta), 
cos(3theta) and so on. And each and every one of them looks exactly like a 
polynomial from some angle.

The same way we plot the values of a polynomial as x goes between -1 and 1, we 
can plot the values of a sum of cosiness as theta goes between 0 and pi. We 
plot on this on this cylindrical surface. Here's what it looks like. We could 
continue plotting it till 2*pi, but it'll just be the mirror image of the part 
till pi, so there's no need to draw it.

Now here's the fantastic part. Take the plane that is the open side of this 
half cylinder of radius 1. Let all the drawn points fall onto the plane. What 
you get on the plane is an actual polynomial curve. Alternately you could just 
see the sum of cosines from in front of the plane. Once we remove depth 
distortions, we'll see the polynomial exactly. If you want to see the sum of 
cosines more clearly, you can also unroll the curved surface into a plane of 
length pi, and draw the curve there. Let's take a simple curve, like 
cos(theta)/2. After drawing it, we curve the surface back and view it from the 
front. And it looks like a straight line!

Let's see why this is. We'll take the help of the top view which shows our 
progress on the curved surface more clearly. We plot starting from theta=0, 
where its value is 1/2. When viewed from in front, that clearly corresponds to 
x=1, and y=1/2. When we try to plot it for some other value of theta, what are 
the x and y values that we see? The y value is simple, it would just be the 
same as the value of the function being plotted, so the y coordinate in this 
case would be cos(theta)/2. For the x value, let's look at the top view. As you 
can see, the x value is the bottom side of the right angled triangle with angle 
theta. So the x value would be cos(theta). That means we're just seeing the 
line y=x/2.

cos(theta)/2 was simple, but what about the function cos(2theta)? At angle 
theta, we're plotting a poitn with the y coordinate being cos(2theta). Again 
angle theta corresponds to an x coordinate of cos(theta). So how can I write 
the y value, cos(2theta), in terms of the x value cos(theta)? We just have to 
recall the trigonometry we learnt at school: cos(2*theta) is actually just 
2*cos^2(theta) - 1. So on the plane we're plotting y = 2*x^2 - 1.

---

Great, so what about functions like cos(3theta)? You can try pausing this and 
working it out yourself. We know cos(3theta) is cos(2theta)cos(theta) - 
sin(2theta)sin(theta). Knowing that sin(2theta) is 2sin(theta)cos(theta), this 
becomes cos(2theta)cos(theta) - 2cos(theta)sin^2(theta). Again sin^2(theta) = 1 
- cos^2(theta) and we already know that cos(2theta) is 2cos^2(theta)-1. So now 
the whole expression is just in terms of cos(theta) and it simplifies to 
4cos(theta)^3 - 3cos(theta). So this would give us the polynomial y = 4x^3- 3x

We can use induction to continue along these lines for any cos(ntheta). If 
you're trying this proof by induction, it would be useful to also prove that 
sin(ntheta) is sin(theta) times a polynomial in cos(theta). You can carry out 
these proofs just using the classic trigonometric identities shown here for 
cos(A+B), sin(A+B), and the one that says sin^2(theta) is 1-cos^2(theta). And 
all these special polynomials, one for each cos(ntheta), form the family of 
Shevs.

This explains the behaviour of the degree 5 Shev. It's just the polynomial you 
get by drawing cos(5theta) on the curved surface and looking at it from the 
front. The properties we marvelled at in the previous episode follow easily. 
Let's see it here by drawing cos(5theta) on the plane above and tracking what 
value of x we get using the top view. cos(5theta) starts at 1 when theta is 0, 
which corresponds to an x value of 1. It goes to -1 when theta is pi/5, which 
correponds to an x value of cos(pi/5). And it continues in this manner while 
never going below -1 or above 1. So it has 5 arcs as theta goes from 0 to pi. 
We've figured out the secret of the Shev. Ah, I hope I still have some things 
left to ask Shev when I meet it.

---

: Hey fellows.
: Hey Shev, we were just getting to know the people here. They explained to me 
how your movements are so precise. So what have you been doing here on your 
break?
: Not much, I've just been practicing inside my own cylindrical arena instead 
of the plane arena for a change.
: That's good. So I take it your plan is to first defeat all the polynomials 
that are projections of sums of cosines, and then to turn your focus to 
polynomials that aren't projections of sum of cosines?
: Ah, you still haven't understood it completely. EVERY polynomial is a 
projection of some sum of cosines. Take the polynomial x^3 for instance. I'll 
show you how to find out which sum of cosines will give you the polynomial x^3. 
Let's start with the highest degree term, which here is x^3 since it's the only 
term. We can get that from cos(3theta)/4, because cos(3theta) starts with a 
4cos^3(theta). Now we have x^3 - 3x/4. To make it x^3 we have to add 3x/4. 
What's important is that this has degree smaller than 3, so we can add 
cos(2theta)s and cos(theta)s to handle it without affecting the degree 3 term 
at all. In this case we add 3cos(theta)/4 since that corresponds to 3x/4. So 
cos(3theta)/4 + 3cos(theta)/4 will give you the polynomial x^3. We could have 
done this with any polynomial, taking care of the highest degree term first and 
then lower degree terms until all terms have been accounted for.
: Wow, that's beautiful. So now you can make any polynomial a sum of cosines 
and then compete with it in your cylindrical arena! Is it easier to compete in 
your arena?
: That's a hard question to answer. There are some peculiarities in this 
cylindrical arena. There are curves that I easily defeat in my arena but that 
defeat me in the plane arena. Luckily they're not polynomials but it highlights 
some of the differences in the arenas.
: How's that possible? Can you show me an example?
: Sure. See this curve that barely increases at all? My maximum slope on the 
cylinder is 5, and its maximum slope is probably less than 1. I defeat it so 
easily. But look as we roll the plane into a half cylinder. At this end there's 
no limit to how steep it becomes. Its slope keeps on increasing, past any 
number you can think of.
: Whoa! So even if you defeat all sums of cosines in your cylindrical arena, 
you still wouldn't have defeated all the polynomials in the actual plane?
: As it turns out, defeating them in this cylindrical arena is actually enough. 
But to prove this requires a little bit of analysis. Let's do that now.

------

Here's the topview again. Everything drawn on the cylindrical surface gets 
projected down to the plane. What we want to know is how slopes on the 
cylindrical surface translate to slopes on the plane. So here's a portion of 
the cylindrical surface. That portion gets projected to a certain portion of 
the plane. As we plot our function on the cylindrical portion, the function 
might have changed its value by some amount. And as we look at the resulting 
plot on the plane, the function would have changed its value by the exact same 
amount, since it's merely a projection that preserves the function value of 
each point. What changes is that the portion on the cylindrical surface has a 
long arc length during which the function value made its changes. On the plane, 
the length of the portion is smaller. So in order to have the same change of 
function value, the plot on the plane must have steeper slopes.

This is especially stark when we look at portions where theta is close to 0. 
With the same arc length as before, the resulting portion on the plane is tiny. 
The change of function value in the arc has to be done in a very short length 
on the plane.

Now that we know what causes the change in slope, let's do a proper analysis of 
how the slope changes. You can pause and do it yourself if you want. Let's take 
an arbitrary value of theta, and draw a really small arc at that angle. Now 
let's zoom in so that we can see it clearly. Since it's so small it looks like 
a straight line. When this small arc is projected, the length of the projection 
would be what's shown here. We can compare the length of the arc and the 
projection by noting that they are two sides of a right angled triangle. So the 
ratio is cos of this angle, but we don't know what angle that is. However, we 
also know that this angle here is theta. So our unknown angle must be 90-theta. 
And the ratio of the lengths of the projected portion and the arc is 
cos(90-theta), or in other words, sin(theta).

That's the analysis of the slopes. The slope at a point on the plane is 
1/sin(theta) times the slope on the cylinder.

So you see, I have a maximum slope of 5 in the cylindrical arena. It is still 
possible for a sum of cosines that I have defeated to have slope larger than 25 
in their projection. But this can only happen when sin(theta) is smaller than 
1/5. sin(theta) is 0 when theta is 0, and is 1 when theta is pi/2. If I split 
this interval into 5 equal parts, notice that sin(theta) is smaller than 1/5 
only in the part closest to theta=0. That's because it has the steepest slopes 
there, and so it must increase past 1/5 in that interval. So if a sum of 
cosines I have defeated in the cylindrical arena has any chance of defeating me 
in the plane arena, it can only defeat me in these last intervals. BUT! In the 
previous episode, we showed that no degree 5 polynomial can defeat me in my 
last arcs. Putting these together, there is no way for a sum of cosines I 
defeat in the cylindrical surface to defeat me in the plane.

: So, two questions. Firstly, all you have to do now is to show that these sum 
of cosines up to cos(5theta) can't have a slope larger than 5 while staying 
between 1 and -1. What's your plan for showing this? And secondly, you seem to 
have a nice way of finding out slopes of the projections. We know from your 
polynomial representation that your slope reaches 25 at x=1. How about for the 
other Shev's in the family? Finding out their polynomial representation adn 
then differentiating them sounds complicated. Can you analyze their slopes more 
easily?

: I'll start with the second question. We know that to find my slope at x=1, 
you just find the slope of cos(5theta) at theta=0 and then divide it by 
sin(theta). But that'll give you 0/0. So instead you have to find the limit as 
theta goes to 0. With a little bit of familiarity with differentiation, you'll 
see the result is 5 times -sin(5theta) divided by sin(theta). Using L'hopital's 
rule for which I guess you'll provide the viewers a reference, you can 
differentiate this again and get -25 times cos(5theta) divided by cos(theta). 
At theta=0, this is just -25. So that's the answer. If you plot me on the 
cylinder near theta=0 and project it on the plane, the plot will be moving down 
with a slope of -25 on the plane. And for my degree-$d$ siblings, the same 
calculation will get you d^2 as the magnitude of their slope.

Now for your first question, yes all I have to do is show that any sum of 
cosines up to cos(5theta) can't have a slope larger than 5 while staying 
between 1 and -1 on the cylinder. How will I go about doing that, I honestly 
don't know. The polynomial view had its plusses. You could shift it around and 
it would still be a polynomial, that doesn't happen for sums of cosines. And 
how many times can shifted sums of cosines intersect anyway? We knew that 
polynomials can intersect only 5 times. I feel like I lose my main tool when I 
go away from polynomials. But I'm done thinking about it for now. I'll just 
spend the rest of this holiday at home reliving my childhood instead of 
breaking my head. There's some mythological works of our people that I loved 
reading as a kid. Maybe I'll reread those. I remember one very mysterious one 
in particular, it was called the legend of half times x+1/x.

: Well, sounds like a great plan for a holiday. Thanks for the interview, I'll 
see you later!